okay we're now going to see how noisy
channel methods are used as the basis
for modern
translation so we looked at noisy
channels before the idea was that we
have a source signal that gets
transferred to our channel and that's
our mode of communication and the noisy
channel model is essentially a
parametric probabilistic model of
language and translation so let's see
how it works we're given so foreign
language sentence F and we have to guess
the English translation e so we're going
to think of this process as follows we
have the English sentence either one
that we try to guess and we convert it
to a foreign language centers using an
encoder from E to F so now we actually
observe this F and we want to guess back
the original e so this is down to a
decoder that gets the F as input and
produces here's the output actually
doesn't produce it produces a prime but
we want to pick such any prime that is
as close as possible as to the original
a that was really the English sentence
so now we have a translation model and a
language model and we're going to pick
the e that maximizes this probability so
we want the probability of e given F to
be largest and we're going to model this
using a the Bayesian theorem by
representing it as the product of the
translation model F given e and the
language model e so P of e just means
given this English string what's the
probability that it forms a valid
English sentence and P of F given he
says if we have this particularly
English string e and this particular
foreign sentence F was the probability
that F was produced by e so let's look
at an example suppose that we want to
translate for French this expression in
Fleur hoosh let's look at several
different candidates again we have an
infinite number of candidates for
English we just want to look at some of
them and see how this method works so
the first one is a flower and the second
one is red flower our third one is
flower at R and so on so let's see what
are the values for P of E and P of F
given E and the product of those for
each of those examples
so our flower head has very low
POV because a flower head is not the
trigram that you expect to see in
English however it has a high value for
P of F given e because it has the exact
words that we expect to see in that
translation and then if you multiply
those two we're probably going to get a
relatively low score the same thing
applies to the next two lines of this
table okay the flower R is also very
good in terms of its relationship to the
foreign sentence but it's not a
legitimate English translation and
sending applies to the third one now
let's look at our ED dog now I read dog
is going to have a much higher P of e
because it's something that you expect
to see in English but P of F given is
going to be low because the words here
are not the ones that we saw in the
French sentence next one is dog cat
mouth that is going to have low values
for both of those features and finally
our head flower is going to have high
values for both and therefore high
product so the idea here is if we can
estimate P of E and P of F given E and
multiply them together we can rank all
the candidate English phrases based on
this product and pick the one with the
highest score that's the correct
translation so here's an example we want
to go for example with between English
and Chinese we have some text in Chinese
we want to find for every English
sentence the probability of the Chinese
sentence given English sentence multiply
it with the probability of the English
sentence and that is going to give us an
estimate of the probability of the
English given the Chinese okay so noisy
channel models are used not only for
machine translation but for many other
tasks for example for text to text
generation or summarization where the
input is a long document and the output
is a short document so in the lecture on
summarization we talked about this
method but also things like text to
signal speech recognition OCR spelling
correction in each of those cases we
have as input one type of text or
representation and the output is another
type of text or a presentation and with
the noisy channel converts one to the
other so specifically in OCR we have the
probability of the text
given the pixel map is the product of
the probability of the text times the
probability of the pixels given a text
so the IBM model that was developed in
the early 90s and is probably one of the
most fundamental contributions to
natural language processing goes like
this we're going to start with the
sentence in one language and then we're
going to perform a sequence of
transformations to it until we get to
the centers in the target language so
some of those transformations may look
very unintuitive however they have been
picked for very good reason they are all
relatively possible or straightforward
to implement computationally so this is
an engineering achievement more than a
linguistic achievement because we want a
system that works even if it's not
necessarily based on the way that humans
actually do the translation so bear with
me for a second and you'll see what the
story is and we can discuss later if it
makes sense so here's how we want to
translate from English to French I
watched an interesting play so in the
first step which is actually the order
of steps here in this example doesn't
match the order that the IBM system uses
but it will still give you a good idea
how it works so the first step we're
going to reproduce each of those words
in English as many times as we need to
get the actual number of words in the
french translation as we saw before the
word play in english is translated it's
three words in french so we're going to
have some like this i watched watched an
interesting play play play so the reason
why we have three plays is because the
french translation of play has three
words and the reason why we have two
words for watched is because the french
translation of watched is also going to
have two words okay the next thing that
we need to do is to now figure out the
right word order so because in french
the nouns and adjectives appear in a
different order than in english we're
going to switch their order we were
going to get i watched watched and play
play play interesting and then in the
final step we're going to convert each
of those English words into one of the
French
words that corresponds to it so I
becomes J ' for sure
watch becomes a view play becomes PS
duty at an interesting becomes
interasante
so this is how the IBM model works
roughly we have essentially three sets
of probabilities the first one is the
so-called fertility probability which
tells us what's the probability that the
word of length an expression of length I
in one of the languages is going to be
translated as an expression of length J
in the other language the second is the
word ordering or distortion so it tells
us was the probability that the word in
position 7 in one language is going to
switch to position 8 in the other
language and vice versa
and finally we have the translation
probabilities which tell us what's the
probability that a certain word in
English gets translated to a certain
word in French and each of those
probabilities are is automatically
obtained by using a method called e/m or
expectation maximization from pairs of
aligned sentences in those two languages
so I'm not going to go through a lot of
detail about those models I just want to
list them here there are 5 p.m. train
models so translation alignment of
fertility the ones that are animation
and also models 4 and 5 which includes
something called class-based alignment
and non deficient algorithm here some of
the steps that we need to undertake in
order to do machine translation we first
have to tokenize the input document into
words then we have to perform sentence
alignment so most of the time we're
going to have one-to-one alignments
especially when in the case of good
parallel corpora such as the hazards or
perhaps - - - which are relatively rare
that's when sentence a and B into one
language get translated into let's say
sentences x and y in the other language
but a doesn't exactly match to x and b
doesn't exactly match to y and finally
we have other examples for example 2 to
1 or 1 to 2 mappings where one sentence
in one language gets split into two or
more sentences
so the method that has been used first
on this problem was by church and Gayle
and it was based on sentence lengths so
they look at sequences of 4 grams and
cognates between the languages
especially this especially works for
languages like French and English and
this is the kind of alignments that they
get so they'll look at the paragraph
length in English and the paragraph
length in German and you can see that
the paragraph lengths are highly
correlated the scatterplot diagram shows
you that very easily and then in their
output they see that most of the pairs
of sentences have a one-to-one mapping
89% of them have that and they're there
few examples of 2 to 1 and 1 to 2
alignments or 1 to 0 0 to 1000 to
millionaire less than 1% and finally a
few examples a little bit over 1% of 2
to 2 alignments so once you got perform
sentence alignment you can apply the IBM
models 1 2 3 and so on if necessary to
learn the actual translations fertility
and distortion probabilities so let's
look briefly at IBM more than one so IBM
other one is based on alignments of
sentences so for example you have a pair
la maison bleue in french with the blue
house and you look at all the possible
alignments they can be things like 1 2 3
which means that the first French word
becomes the first English word the
second becomes a second and the third
one becomes a third one the second
alignment is 1 3 2 which means that the
first French word becomes the first
English word but then you swap the order
of the second and the third one and
there are the combinations for example
you can say that the second English word
doesn't exist in French but the third
English word corresponds to the second
and third French words we can go even to
an extreme and say that all three words
in French get translated as the first
word in the English sentence but the
second and third English words did not
appear in the French at all so there's a
certain number of such alignments and
you have to consider all of them and at
the beginning in to go to assume that
all of them are equally likely and then
the EMR Gotham is going to tell you
which one is most likely and at the
time give you the most likely alignments
between individual words so we're not
going to go into a lot of detail about
IBM models one two and three however if
you're interested in that you can go and
read an excellent tutorial by Kevin
Knight which is available on his website
and you can also download an
implementation of a statistical machine
translation system called Moses from
Stata empty dot org we're going to
continue in the next segment with some
advanced methods for machine translation